Just a bit earlier in the series, we introduced
the angiosperms, which are the flowering plants.
This is an incredibly diverse clade that includes
everything from asparagus to apples, from
clovers to cacti, from oil palms to potatoes,
from maize to mistletoe, and many others.
So now it’s time to dive into that diversity
so we can further classify them.
Angiosperm evolution is complicated, and it’s
possible that our current classification may
be rewritten someday.
However, current cladistical modeling indicates
that they can be broadly separated into “basal”
and “core” groups.
The basal angiosperm clade is paraphyletic,
meaning that it includes the most recent common
ancestor of all the organisms, but does not
contain all of the descendants of that common
ancestor, as opposed to being monophyletic,
which would mean that it does contain all
the descendants of the most recent common
ancestor.
The basal clade contains only about 175 species
that diverged early on in angiosperm evolution.
The basal angiosperms include the Amborellales,
a monophyletic order of small shrubs, the
Nymphaeales, an order of aquatic plants, such
as the water lilies, and the Austrobaileyales,
an order of woody trees, shrubs, and vines
such as star anise.
The core angiosperm clade, also known as the
mesangiospermae is monophyletic and includes
over 99.9% of all flowering plants.
They are further divided into five clades,
the ceratophyllales, chloranthales, magnoliidae,
monocots, and eudicots.
The clade ceratophyllaceae is a cosmopolitan
family, meaning it is found all over the world,
and it includes a single extant genus of aquatic
flowering plants commonly known as hornworts,
where extant means still in existence today.
The clade chloranthaceae is a family of woody
plants found in many tropical regions around
the world and often used in traditional medicines.
Now, it might seem like I’ve already covered
a lot of angiosperm diversity.
However, the five clades I’ve just mentioned,
though evolutionarily distinct, account for
only about 0.1% of known angiosperms.
The clade magnoliidae makes up another 2%
of all known flowering plants.
This group of plants includes species that
are economically important for food, drugs,
perfume, and timber.
They include some more widely cultivated tropical
species like the avocado, black pepper, cinnamon,
and soursop.
They also include the ornamental magnolia
trees, the laurels, and others.
So that leaves us with just two clades left
to cover, the monocots and the eudicots.
These two clades make up almost 98% of all
flowering plants and are the two groups most
commonly discussed in angiosperm classification.
Their names refer to the first embryonic leaves,
or seed leaves, that appear on the plant embryo.
These are also called cotyledons.
A monocot embryo has a single cotyledon while
a eudicot has two cotyledons.
The monocots account for about 60,000 species,
which make up roughly 23% of all named angiosperms.
The largest family of monocots, by far, are
the orchids, which account for about 20,000
to 28,000 accepted species.
Orchids alone represent about 6-11% of all
seed-producing plants.
Though orchids are often thought of as tropical
species, and it is true that their diversity
is greatest in the tropics, they’re actually
found on every continent except Antarctica.
Other major groups of monocots include the
bamboos, palms, lilies, and grasses.
The majority of the biomass produced in agriculture
comes from the monocots.
This is because all major grains, like rice,
wheat, maize, barley, millet, and oats are
monocots.
The same goes for all forage grasses, which
are used as feed for cattle, along with sugarcane,
bananas, gingers, pineapples, leeks, onions,
and garlic.
In addition, many bulb plants cultivated for
their blooms, like bluebells and tulips, are
all monocots.
Moving on, traditionally the angiosperms had
been separated into two groups, the monocots
and the dicots.
This is because monocots have many distinctive
features that separate them from dicots.
For example, monocot leaves usually have parallel
veins, while dicot veins are usually branched.
Monocot stems have vascular tissues arranged
in a complex array of tiny bundles throughout
the stem, while dicot stems have their vascular
bundles arranged in a ring.
The petals of monocot flowers are generally
arranged in multiples of three, while dicot
flowers are generally in multiples of fours
or fives.
Finally, the roots of monocots form a fibrous
system, like a mat of threads that spread
out below the soil surface.
Dicot roots, however, have a large vertical
taproot that burrows deeper into the soil.
However, this simplified two group system
has since been abandoned.
Although all of those characteristics are
still unique to the monocots, the old classification
of “dicot” has since been split up into
the basal angiosperms and magnoliidae that
were mentioned earlier, and the eudicots or
“true” dicots.
The eudicots make up about 75% of all flowering
plants.
They are all evolutionarily related and distinguished
from all other flowering plants by the grooved
tricolpate structure of their pollen.
All other angiosperm groups produce monosulcate
pollen, with a single pore set in a groove
of a different orientation.
Some botanists prefer to call the eudicots
“tricolpates” in order to avoid confusion
with the old dicot classification.
However, since they’re more commonly referred
to as eudicots, we can stick to that here.
The eudicots include most shrubs and leafy
trees, along with the carnivorous plants,
many ornamental flowers, and a huge range
of food crops including most fruits, vegetables,
and nuts.
Apples, coffee, pumpkins, celery, cannabis,
nightshade, oaks, maples, corpse flowers,
eucalyptus, aspen, dandelions, oranges, buttercups,
morning glories, cacti, cherries, cranberries,
carnations, and so many other plants are all
classified as eudicots.
This clade includes a truly staggering amount
of species that have adapted to unique habitats
all over the world, from the hottest deserts,
to some of the coldest tundras, and everywhere
in between.
Perhaps we will take a closer look at some
of these species a bit later in the series.
But for now, that completes an introduction
to a general classification of the most diverse
extant group of plants, the angiosperms.